h1. Enlive

Enlive is a selector-based (à la CSS) templating library for Clojure. 

An Enlive template has two parts: a HTML file and a @deftemplate@ form somewhere in a clj file.


h2. What's wrong with the old Enlive?

Premature optimization. It drove me to write a convoluted and limited system. The new Enlive is more regular, more powerful and easier to reason about.

I made it work (old Enlive), I'm making it right (new Enlive) and I'll make it faster.   


h2. What's new in Enlive?

Transformations (the right-hand parts of rules) are now plain old closures. These functions take one arg (the selected node) and return nil, another node or an arbitrarily nested collection of nodes.

Rules are applied top-down: the first rule transforms the whole tree and the resulting tree is passed to the next rules.

Nodes are transformed deep-first, that is: if a selector selects several nodes, descendants are transformed first. Hence, when the transformation is applied to an ancestor, you can "see" the transformed descendants (but you can not see your transformed siblings).

<pre>
   /B                                                                             /(T B)
  A    if A and B are selected and transformed by T the the resulting tree is (T A      )
   \C                                                                             \C
</pre>


h2. Templates and snippets

A snippet is a function that returns a seq of nodes, it can be used as a building block for more complex templates.

A template is a function that returns a seq of string -- basically it's a snippet whose output is serialized. Templates return a seq of strings to avoid building the whole string.

Templates and snippets transform a source (specified as a path (to access resources on the classpath), a File, a Reader, an InputStream, an URI, an URL, an element or a seq of nodes).


h2. The @at@ form

The @at@ form is the most important form in Enlive. There are implicit @at@ forms in @snippet@ and @template@.  

<pre>
  (at a-node
    [:a :selector] a-transformation
    [:another :selector] another-transformation
    ...)
</pre>

The right-hand value of a rule can be nil. It's the idiomatic way to remove an element.

Transformations are closures which take one arg (the selected node) and return nil, another node or an arbitrarily nested collection of nodes.

Rules are applied top-down: the first rule transforms the whole tree and the resulting tree is passed to the next rules.


h2. Selectors

Enlive enforces (in @select*@ and @transform-loc@) that selectors can only match elements.   

h3. Syntax

A selector is either a vector or a set of selectors (denoting grouping).

Each element in the vector is either a combinator, a "simple selector":http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/WD-css3-selectors-20090310/#simple-selectors-dfn or a compound selector (union or intersection), here is a summary:

<pre>
  Enlive                           CSS
  =======================================================
  :>                               >
  :*                               *
  :div                             div
  :div#some-id                     div#some-id
  :div.class1.class2               div.class1.class2
  :*#foo.bar                       *#foo.bar
  :#foo.bar                        #foo.bar
  (attr? :href)                    *[href]
  (attr? :href :title)             *[href][title]
  (attr= :href "foo")              *[href=foo]
  (attr= :href "foo" :title "bar") *[href=foo][title=bar]
  [:a.action (attr? :href)]        a.action[href]
  #{:div :p}                       _no equivalent_
  (attr-has :foo "bar" "baz")      *[foo~=bar][foo~=baz]   
  (attr-starts                     *[href^=foo][title^=bar]
    :href "foo" :title "bar")
  (attr-ends                       *[href$=foo][title$=bar]
    :href "foo" :title "bar")
  (attr-contains                   *[href*=foo][title*=bar]
    :href "foo" :title "bar")
  (attr|= :lang "fr")              *[lang|=fr]
  root                             *:root
  (nth-child 3)                    *:nth-child(3)
  (nth-child 4 2)                  *:nth-child(4n+2)
  (nth-last-child 3)               *:nth-last-child(3)
  (nth-last-child 4 2)             *:nth-last-child(4n+2)
  (nth-of-type 3)                  *:nth-of-type(3)
  (nth-of-type 4 2)                *:nth-of-type(4n+2)
  (nth-last-of-type 3)             *:nth-last-of-type(3)
  (nth-last-of-type 4 2)           *:nth-last-of-type(4n+2)
  first-child                      *:first-child
  last-child                       *:last-child
  first-of-type                    *:first-of-type
  last-of-type                     *:last-of-type
  only-child                       *:only-child
  only-of-type                     *:only-of-type
  void                             *:empty
  odd                              *:nth-child(odd)
  even                             *:nth-child(even)
  (but :a)                         :not(a)
  (has [:a])                       no equivalent
  [:p (left :h1)]                  h1 + p  
  [:p (lefts :h1)]                 h1 ~ p
  [:p (right :h1)]                 no equivalent  
  [:p (rights :h1)]                no equivalent
</pre>

Some examples:

<pre>
  [:div]                                       div
  [:body :script]                              body script
  #{[:ul.outline :> :li] [:ol.outline :> li]}  ul.outline > li, ol.outline > li 
  [#{:ul.outline :ol.outline} :> :li]          ul.outline > li, ol.outline > li
  [[#{:ul :ol} :.outline] :> :li]              ul.outline > li, ol.outline > li
</pre>

h3. Compilation

At macroexpansion-time in @select@, @snippet@ and @at@ macros, selectors are compiled to code: (all expansions are edited for clarity)

<pre>
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (compile-selector '[:div])
  (chain descendants-or-self (tag= :div))
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (compile-selector '[:body :script])
  (chain descendants-or-self (tag= :body) descendants-or-self (tag= :script))
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (compile-selector '[#{:ul.outline :ol.outline} :> :li])
  (chain descendants-or-self (union (intersection (tag= :ol) (has-class "outline")) (intersection (tag= :ul) (has-class "outline"))) (tag= :li))
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (compile-selector '[[:div (attr= :title "foobar")]])
  (chain descendants-or-self (intersection (tag= :div) (attr= :title "foobar")))
</pre>

@(compile-selector '[:div])@ is equivalent to @(macroexpand-1 '(selector [:div]))@.

@at@, @select@, @snippet@ are macros that expect a selector to be passed. If you want to use a value instead of the selector, you have to use @at*@, @select*@ and @snippet*@ which are the functions behind the macro sugar.

<pre>
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (macroexpand-1 '(at node [:div] (content "It's a div")))
  (at* [node] (selector [:div]) (content "It's a div"))
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (macroexpand-1 '(select some-html some-selector))
  (select* some-html (selector some-selector))
</pre>

The relation between @snippet@ and @snippet*@ is more complex: @snippet*@ doesn't not take a selector, you have to select your nodes before (through @select@ or @select*@). 

<pre>
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (-> '(snippet a-source [:div#foo] [args] selector1 transformation1) macroexpand-1)
  (snippet* (select (html-resource a-source) [:div#foo]) [args] selector1 transformation1)
  net.cgrand.enlive-html=> (-> '(snippet a-source [:div#foo] [args] selector1 transformation1) macroexpand-1 macroexpand-1)
  (let [nodes__4595__auto__ (select (html-resource a-source) [:div#foo])] 
    (fn [args] 
      (flatmap #(at % selector1 transformation1)) nodes__4595__auto__)))
</pre>


h2. Transformations

A transformation is a function that returns either a node or collection of node.

Enlive defines several helper functions:
<pre>
  content            (content "xyz" a-node "abc")             
  html-content       (html-content "<blink>please no</blink>")
  wrap               (wrap :div) or (wrap :div {:class "foo"}) 
  unwrap             unwrap
  set-attr           (set-attr :attr1 "val1" :attr2 "val2")
  remove-attr        (remove-attr :attr1 :attr2) 
  add-class          (add-class "foo" "bar")
  remove-class       (remove-class "foo" "bar")
  do->               (do-> transformation1 transformation2) 
  clone-for          (clone-for [item items] transformation)
                     or (clone-for [item items] 
                          selector1 transformation1
                          selector2 transformation2)
  append             (append "xyz" a-node "abc")
  prepend            (prepend "xyz" a-node "abc")
  after              (after "xyz" a-node "abc")
  before             (before "xyz" a-node "abc")
  substitute         (substitute "xyz" a-node "abc")
  move
</pre>